---
layout: post
title: Recap of 2026 Challenge Academic Competition
subtitle: First time joining, you know
cover-img:
thumbnail-img:
share-img:
tags: [personal]
author: dzungphieuluuky
---

# Introduction
This is a small recap for the academic competition "Thách Thức" organized by the FIT faculty at HCMUS. The reason I'm writing this blog is to recap my experiences after the competition and the process of getting to know three other super high-quality new friends from the famously renowned APCS program. This blog will include experiences from the moment the team members invited me to join the group up until the present moment when I'm writing this blog, hoping we can give it our all (in a metaphorical sense, of course) until the final round.

# Past Competition Attempts

Well, to be honest, I had actually participated in Thách Thức in 2025. I didn't join the competition in 2024 because I was just a freshman back then and didn't have much knowledge related to information technology or computer science in general, and of course, I wasn't interested in artificial intelligence either, so my life was pretty aimless back then, one day just like another. Then in my second year, which is 2024, I was fortunate to have a friend group of about 5-6 close friends, so I invited them to join the competition with me for fun, mainly for the experience since our team's capabilities were pretty mediocre at the time. And mediocre we indeed were, because we failed right at the qualifying round. In that round, I personally scored 31 points, while the others were a bit lower than me, around 19-26 points. As usual, the competition organizers selected the top 18 teams with the highest scores from this round to advance to the qualifiers. Since our team didn't have enough points, our journey had to stop right at the starting line 🥲. Well, we didn't get a chance to advance, but at least I learned what the qualifying test looked like and what knowledge was needed to be able to tackle the exam.

# Joining the Team
One sunny and windy day, a classmate from my homeroom invited me to join them for the Thách Thức 2026 competition. They had already gathered 4 people (including themselves) but still needed 2 more (6 total) to meet the organizers' requirements. Upon joining the team, I realized I knew another person already in the group (and actually, this person was even sharing the same rental place with me, but I had no idea they were on this team). Besides the two people I knew, there were three others who were students from the advanced program, the same age as me, so I thought, "Wow, that's cool. Looks like I'll get to know some folks from the elite class." When I first joined the team, I thought I'd probably only contribute my knowledge since I had no background in competitive programming and wasn't particularly interested in that part.

# First Training Session: Hồng Giang Café
This was our first time meeting in person to brainstorm ideas and strategies for each upcoming test in the qualifiers. Our team decided to meet at a café near my place, but actually, when choosing the spot, my roommate picked this place without considering the travel distance for the others. So some members had to drive up to 12km to get there, which led me to suggest finding another café somewhere more central to help share the gas costs for those coming from far away. In this training session, we mainly established signal conventions for the team for the "bug hunt" round, as we couldn't focus on the other tests yet. Since the other tests could be handled with broad knowledge and everyone's programming skills, this particular round required a huge amount of teamwork, so it needed more focus than the others. During the 3-4 hours at the café, we watched a few matches from the previous year to get a clearer picture of how the competitions would unfold and the relevant rules for each test. For the opening round, we needed to split into two groups: the clue-givers and the word-guessers. The words to guess were all specialized English terminology from the information technology/computer science field, such as databases, operating systems, algorithm complexity theory, software engineering, artificial intelligence, and a few other subfields, $\dots$ For this part, we compiled a list of potential words along with definitions or hints that we thought were suitable for guessing, most of which were taken from previous years' competitions. From there, we planned to use LLMs to find more related words with a similar difficulty or popularity level to cover a wider vocabulary. Personally, I felt I was quite suited for this test because I often roam the internet to learn about things I like. On that journey, I've encountered quite a few interesting vocabulary words and concepts across various fields like those mentioned above. So I intended to try to score high right from this part, as it was the first test, and getting a lot of points early on would boost the team's morale and stabilize our mindset for the subsequent tests. For the bug hunt round, our team tried to identify the necessary characters frequently used in code to prepare signals for them using body language, as we weren't allowed to communicate verbally in this round and had to use physical gestures to relay information. Additionally, the members specializing in competitive programming aimed to find questions from previous competitions to gather clues about the difficulty level and question style. Since our team had three members strong in competitive programming, the relay programming round relied heavily on them, while the others would prepare code templates for them to focus on the main logic of the problems. For the final round of the qualifiers, the direct face-off, the team simply decided that whoever knew the answer would give it, as the knowledge required for this part was very broad and included calculations, leaving us no time to train together for it. After the first training session, we had mainly just met each other and set up the basics without much actual training.

# Second Training Session: Okkio Coffee
Well, this time we chose a different café located more centrally to make it easier for everyone to travel and share the distance. We met at a café in District 3 on Phạm Ngọc Thạch Street. In this session, we changed who would handle the communication in the bug hunt round. Initially, the team planned for someone familiar with Vim to be the receiver, typing to complete the task, but later we realized we could use VS Code instead, so the receiving role was reassigned to me, while the others focused on finding the bugs hidden in the code provided by the organizers. After deciding this, Dương and I began practicing to memorize the signals used for communication. We agreed we needed to cover all letters, numbers, and special characters by tracing them in the air, and I would watch the strokes to guess. We also needed to establish signals for special actions like opening files, submitting answers, switching between the terminal and editor, etc. Besides that, the team practiced the opening round, where I acted as a word-guesser with Tâm and Dương. The remaining members were the clue-givers. This round was the first time most of my knowledge came into play, as I frequently wander the internet to self-learn many things I find interesting. In the spirit that school-taught knowledge is too limited to cover the keywords appearing in this round, we practiced a few rounds, and I seemed to guess quite well and quickly. So I was fixed in the guessing group, aiming to score as many points as possible in this part to create a springboard for later rounds, allowing us to compete more comfortably and achieve better results. We practiced until around 10:00 PM, when the group disbanded and went home (since it was closing time, and a staff member reminded us :D).

# Final Training Session: Dooing Lab Coffee
This time, our team decided to come to school early for our final practice, but it coincided with a day full of events, so the campus was quite crowded. As a result, we had to move to a café near the school called Dooing Lab Coffee to practice. Since the competition was approaching, we mainly rehearsed the two main rounds – Bug Hunt and Opening – to get a bit more familiar and prepare. Around 3:00 PM, we moved to the school to get ready and set up our attire (since the organizers gifted each member a competition shirt for uniformity). Upon arriving, we asked the organizer one last time and discovered that only five members could participate throughout the entire match, with no substitutions allowed between rounds, contrary to our original plan. The team panicked a bit, finally deciding that Duy would be the reserve member, while the remaining five would be the official participants. Since Dương and I were irreplaceable as the signaler and receiver for the Bug Hunt round, we had to participate. The team panicked only slightly before quickly calming down and rearranging the competition lineup.

# The Competition
Well, kicking off the match, our team secured 50 points in the opening round. Although we narrowly missed our target (I had estimated around 60-70 points), fortunately, the other two teams only scored 30 points each in this round, so we had a pretty good start. In the relay programming round, because we weren't accustomed to the problem format and the organizers hadn't pre-opened a text editor for us to start coding, we encountered quite a few issues with creating and saving files. Consequently, none of the three teams in this match scored any points, so the standings remained unchanged. Moving on to the bug hunt round, fortunately, our team had practiced this part thoroughly and had complete communication protocols for coding, submitting, opening files, and other miscellaneous tasks. Additionally, having members with competitive programming backgrounds meant they quickly identified the hidden bugs in the code, and we rapidly scored points for the first two questions. For the last question, our team found the bug but ran out of time to complete and submit, so we couldn't secure those points. Nevertheless, the points from the first two questions increased our lead over the other two teams, putting us in a significantly safer position as the top team in this qualifier. In the final round of the qualifiers (yup, this round only had four competitions; honestly, I wanted more to really get into it), it was the direct face-off. This round consisted of three matches, with each team taking turns starting. Our team encountered some questions about computer architecture and MIPS, and naturally, we didn't score on those because the knowledge was unfamiliar, not taught in class, and no one had a particular interest in that area. But fortunately, the subsequent questions were relatively easier, and our team successfully scored points. There was one question about the complexity of the Eratosthenes sieve algorithm; one of our members was very knowledgeable about this area and quickly selected the correct answer. Even so, our team was (or perhaps had the fortune to be) questioned by the supervising teacher about this answer, who probed us on why we chose it. It seemed our teammate's response successfully satisfied the teacher, who then stopped asking. And the final question, the seventh (well, that's my lucky and favorite number), was the match-ender. It asked what shape you get when you cut a plane through a cone such that the plane is not parallel to the base or the axis of symmetry. The obvious answer was a conic section, specifically an ellipse. The team next to us, although very strong in math, fortunately for us chose hyperbola, which was, of course, incorrect. And so, our team ended the match with a score of 249, dominating the direct face-off round and becoming champions of Qualifier 6. With this result, our team advances to the semi-finals to compete against other, even stronger teams. And guess what? We drew one of the strongest teams in this year's Thách Thức, a team that successfully reached the finals in previous years and seems determined to go all out for the championship this year. Wow, looks like I need to step up my game even more.